# Project Proposal: Group Assignment 1

## Introduction

We propose to research and map the availability and quality of existing “dirty” energy jobs versus green jobs across California. To that end, our research will answer the following questions: 

1. Where in California are existing fossil fuel/"dirty" energy jobs located relative to green jobs? 
2. What are the demographics in the regions where green jobs are located relative to fossil fuel jobs?

Evaluated together, these research questions will provide a visualization of geographic accessibility of clean energy jobs versus fossil fuel jobs for disadvantaged communities. Disadvantaged communities are defined as the top 25% scoring areas from CalEnviroScreen, which considers socioeconomic, public health and environmental hazard criteria.

## Project Relevance: Why is our project important and what is at stake? 

Our research will inform the work of California’s Green New Deal (CA GND) Coalition, a coalition of community organizations that advocates for rapid de-carbonization across the state to create a vibrant zero-carbon economy for all Californians. We will provide easy-to-understand maps to support the CA GND Coalition’s efforts to reintroduce a California Green New Deal bill in upcoming legislative sessions. Their work is of particular urgency in this moment; as the nation prepares for a Biden-Harris administration, we have an opportunity at the state level to advance an inclusive, just transition that can serve as a model for national policy.

A fundamental goal of the California Green New Deal (CA GND) Coalition is to create good quality green jobs for low-income communities of color in California. Yet, a transition to green jobs inevitably means a loss of fossil fuel jobs—jobs that often employ people from and are located in disadvantaged communities. Our project aims to support the CA GNC Coalition with comparative, spatialized insight into the workforce realities of two twinned processes: a transition to clean energy and away from fossil fuel. To ensure an equitable, just transition, we must understand the extent to which green jobs are more or less geographically accessible to disadvantaged communities.

## Spatial Scope: Why do space and time matter to our project?

Our project aims to map “dirty” and green energy jobs across the state of California, since this will be the most useful spatial scope to inform the California Green New Deal Coalition in its work to advance a zero-carbon economy across the state. We will be flexible and redefine the parameters of our spatial scope depending on the availability of data, but a state-wide map will be the most useful to inform CA GND Coalition policy proposals. 

## Data Sources

[CA Energy Commission Power Plants Data](https://cecgis-caenergy.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/california-power-plants/data?geometry=-154.211%2C31.065%2C-75.461%2C43.271). This dataset provides the location of every power plant in California, both renewable and fossil fuel. It contains data on plant emissions and lifespan as well. This data will allow us to map power plants across the state by type.

[2018 County Business Patterns Data](https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?g=0400000US06.050000&d=ANN%20Business%20Patterns%20County%20Business%20Patterns&n=2111%3A2211%3A2212%3A32411%3A486&tid=CBP2018.CB1800CBP&hidePreview=true). This County Business Patterns (CBP) data provides employment numbers among fossil fuel and renewable energy sectors across all counties in California. We narrowed the CBP data down to five relevant NAICS codes: 2111 (Oil and gas extraction), 2211 (Electric power generation), 2212 (Natural gas distribution), 32411 (Petroleum refineries), and 486 (Pipeline transportation). We may need to include other sectors (e.g. gas stations) depending on how relevant they are to our analysis.

[CalEnviroScreen 3.0 Data](https://oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/calenviroscreen/document/ces3results.xlsx). Using data from CalEnviroScreen will enable us to situate the fossil fuel and renewable energy sectors with larger social demographics. This dataset is especially useful for understanding the spatial distribution of energy resources in the state and provides an explicit focus on the environmental justice dimensions of energy production.

## Intended Analysis and Resulting Visualizations

Using the data sets elaborated above, we intend to analyze the location of power plants (both renewable and those that rely on fossil fuels), and employment generated by each of the five NAICS codes across different counties. Finally, we will introduce geographic data documenting the demographics near the locations of these sites. This will allow us to compare across fossil fuel industries and clean energy industries, by analyzing the social demographics surrounding each type of site in order to understand who has access to clean jobs and who has access to fossil fuel jobs. Ultimately, our project will produce a dual analysis of who is affected by the transition from fossil fuel to clean energy, based on an understanding of the workforce employed in each industry.

We hope to produce visualizations that demonstrate the geographic accessibility of clean jobs and fossil fuel jobs across the state of California. Our map will show the location of fossil fuel plants and clean energy plants. Within this visualization, we will also include information regarding population and social demographics within a nearby radius of an energy plant.

## Conclusion: Research Insights 

From our research on the availability of energy jobs in the state of California, we expect to produce insights about the availability of different types of jobs across the state, and theorize about what jobs are available to disadvantaged communities. Considering that the just transition to a zero-carbon economy will shift job availability across the state, this question has particular bearing on disadvantaged communities who may experience intersecting vulnerabilities that augment the difficulty of job loss. 

Furthermore, by analyzing population demographics in regions where clean and fossil fuel jobs are respectively located, we hope to make an argument about the make-up of workers in each industry, including factors such as race, ethnicity, and age. This will allow us to draw conclusions about the populations that are affected by a just transition.


